Title: How to find co-founders / collaborators: advice for myself 2 years ago
Slug: tumblr/how-to-find-co-founders-collaborators-advice-for
Date: 2013-06-27 19:25
Tags: []

<p><span>[Today I read a mailing list question from an entrepreneur asking how to find developers who would work for no pay. That struck a chord since I wasted a lot of time trying to do that myself when I was starting out on <a href="http://www.linernotes.com/" target="_blank">LinerNotes</a>. So I wrote this blurb that I wish I could send back in time to myself. Also NB that I&#8217;m still working solo, so take this with a grain of salt!</span><span>]</span></p>
<p><span></span><br/><span>The first thing you need to do is to reverse the way you&#8217;re approaching the problem.</span><br/><span></span><br/><span></span><span>Unless you&#8217;re extremely lucky, y</span><span>ou&#8217;re not going to have a lot of success with &#8220;how can I get people to do what I want?&#8221; No one else cares what you want. They care what they want. So instead you need to think in terms of &#8220;how can I give other people what they want (and satisfy my own needs in the process)?&#8221;</span><br/><span></span><br/><span>No one is going to work for you for free (would you personally spend months helping a stranger out of the kindness of your heart?) They may work for no </span><span><span>cash</span>, </span><span>but only if you can compensate them in some other way that&#8217;s as valuable as cash. So think about what the type of people you need (i.e. programmers) want and think about which of those things you can offer them. The best thing you can offer is traction (i.e. a hugely reduced risk of failure) because everyone wants a seat on a rocket ship. You might offer equity, but if you haven&#8217;t raised money yet then your equity is basically worthless.[1]  Or it might be some connection or hard expertise you can share. If you don&#8217;t have anything at all to offer, then you need to go focus on yourself for a while and figure out how to either develop yourself to be a more useful partner or how to acquire the resources you need to attract people.</span><br/><span></span><br/><span>Applying this framework will give you a &#8220;candidate archetype&#8221; of people with whom you can make a mutually agreeable transaction. Then figure out where that type of person hangs out (e.g. in the UT-Austin computer labs) and go talk directly to them. Computer people are friendly and most of them will talk to strangers as long as you&#8217;re humble in your initial contact.</span><br/><span></span><br/><span>If you&#8217;re talking to a lot of people and not finding anyone, the problem is probably with you. Either you&#8217;re talking to the wrong people (because you didn&#8217;t target well) or you don&#8217;t have enough to offer at this point as a partner.</span><br/><span></span><br/><span></span><br/><span>[1] Rule of thumb &#8212; think about the amount of cash you&#8217;d sell your company for today, and assume the whole equity pie is worth less than 1/10 of that.</span></p>
